# Robust Epidemiological AnaLytics Modeling (REALM) toolkit
The repository contains code for a epidemiological model utilized in the research effort of us. Code created by Chenyi Fu (chenyi_fu_201509@163.com) and please CITE the following when you are utilizing our results：

Chenyi Fu, Minglong Zhou, Melvyn Sim, Robust Epidemiological Analytics, 2022.

This repository contains multiple files, most of them being archived in the `REALM` folder:
1. `REALM/REAML.py` - The current version of main code implemented in our work. It contains multiple functions and users can implement their deterministic/stochastic/robust epidemiological forecast and deterministic/robust optimization models in a straightforward fashion.
    + Number of compartments $N$, number of population groups $J$, and length of planning horizon $T$;  
    + Name and initial population size of each compartment;  
    + Transition probability $\hat{q}^{m,n}$  
    between each pair of compartments $(m,n)$;   
    + Support set (lower and upper bounds) of decision variables;
    + Cost parameters used in objective function;
    + Coefficients in the operational constraints;
    + Approximation approaches to be adopted, \emph{i.e.,} staircase function approximation, McCormick envelopes, and simulation-optimization iteration;
    + The analytics model to be used. Users can choose to adopt a deterministic/stochastic/robust epidemiological forecast model or a deterministic/robust epidemiological optimization model.  
Note that All code is written in Python 3.6 with CPLEX 12.7 and Gurobi 9.1.2.
2. `REALM/SEIHR.py` - An illustrative example used in the case study of our paper. The model contains 8 compartments and 30 decision periods in order to minimize the number of infections and deaths via optimizing the allocation of COVID-19 test and hospital ward under unknown characteristics of Omicron variants. 
3. `REALM/IHRD.py` - An illustrative example used in the case study of our paper, which is a simplificated version of `REALM/SEIHR.py`. It contains 4 compartments and 30 desicion periods to optimize the allocation of hospital wards and ICUs.
4. `REALM/DatasetMD.py` - The parameter settings generated by the open data set from Maryland.gov (opendata.maryland.gov)

In the following section, we provide a guideline to show the functions of `REALM/REAML.py`
## Guideline
### Step 1. Define model and model size

```
# Input dataset 
data = DatasetMD.Coviddata_MD()  
# Initialize a model 
user = REALM.REALM() 
# Initialize the value of period (T) 
period = data.period  
user.set_time(time=period)   
# Initialize the number of group (J)  
group = data.group 
user.set_group(group=group)  
# Initialize the name of compartments by function ``#.set_all_compartment''
population = data.compartment_population 
compartment = ['S','E','I','M','Q','H','R','D']
user.set_all_compartment(name=compartment)
compart_num = len(compartment) # number of compartments
```
Initialize the population of each compartment at time 1 by the function `#.set_population` with two inputs:
1) Input `compartment` is the name of a compartment;
2) Input `population` is a list with J float/int components representing the population of groups.
```
for i in range(compart_num):
    user.set_population(compartment=compartment[i], population=population[i])
```

### Step 2. Define decision variable
Define the flow variables $x^{n,m}_{j,t}$ of the model by function `#.set_flow_variable`
There are four inputs:
1) Inputs `n` and `m` are defined the flow outgoing from compartment `n` and incoming to compartment `m`;
2) Inputs `xupper` and `xlower` are OPTIONAL, representing the upper and lower bounds of the flow variable.
   The format of `xupper` can be 
   (a) a float/int number, which means for all periods and groups, the components in $x^{n,m}$ are same; 
   (b) a list including $T$ components, which means the upper bounds of the components for all groups are same; 
   (c) a list including $J$ components, which means the upper bounds of the components in all periods are same, if $J$ = $T$, rule (c) is prior to rule (b);
   (d) a list including $J*T$ components;
   The default value of `xupper` for all groups and all times is 1e+20;
   The format of `xlower` is same to `xupper`, and its default value is 0
```
S = 6
Test_capacity = [30000 for t in range(period)]
Test_probability = [0.05*(i+1) for i in range(S)]
user.set_flow_variable(n='Q', m = 'H', xupper=[[1000 for t in range(period)] for j in range(group)],
                      xlower=[[0 for t in range(period)] for j in range(group)])
user.set_flow_variable(n='I', m = 'M', xupper=[[Test_capacity[t]*Test_probability[-1]
                                            for t in range(period)] for j in range(group)],
                      xlower=[[0 for t in range(period)] for j in range(group)])
user.set_flow_variable(n='I', m = 'Q', xupper=[[Test_capacity[t]*Test_probability[-1]
                                            for t in range(period)] for j in range(group)],
                      xlower=[[0 for t in range(period)] for j in range(group)])
```
Define the customized variables (e.g., facility location, capacity) by function `#.set_custom_variable`
There are four inputs:
1) Input `name` is the name of a customized variable, and the format should be string;
2) the second input `xupper` is OPTIONAL and defines the upper bound of variable. The format should be float or int and the default value is 1e+20
3) the third input `xlower` is OPTIONAL and defines the lower bound of variable. The format should be float or int and the default value is 0
4) the fourth input `types` is OPTIONAL, and define the type of variable. There are three types of variable: `B` means binary variable; `C` means continuous variable; `I` means integer variable. The default value is `C`.  
We can also use list to define a set of variables (see variable `u` as below)
```
for j in range(group):
    for s in range(S):
        for t in range(period):
            user.set_custom_variable(name='z.' + str(j) + '.' + str(t) + '.' + str(s), xlower=0)
            user.set_custom_variable(name='phi1.' + str(j) + '.' + str(t) + '.'+str(s), xlower=-1e20)
            user.set_custom_variable(name='phi2.' + str(j) + '.' + str(t) + '.'+str(s), xlower=0)
user.set_custom_variable(name=['u.' + str(j) + '.' + str(s) for j in range(group) for s in range(S)],
                         types=['B' for j in range(group) for s in range(S)],
                         xupper=[1 for j in range(group) for s in range(S)],
                         xlower=[0 for j in range(group) for s in range(S)])
```

## Step 3 Define transition probability between compartment and compartment  
Define the decision-independent transition probability by function `#.set_transition_compartment` with four inputs.
1) Inputs 'n' and 'm' are defined the flow outgoing from compartment 'n' and incoming to compartment 'm';
2) Input 'prob' is a $J * T$ list, representing the transition probability from compartment 'n' to 'm' in group $j$ in time $t$.
   The format of 'prob' can be 
   (a) a float/int number, which means for all $t in [T]$ and $j in [J]$, the components in $q^{n,m}$ are same;   
   (b) a list with $T$ components, which means the upper bounds of the components for $j in [J]$ are same;   
   (c) a list with $J$ components, which means the upper bounds of the components for all $t in [T]$ are same, if $J = T$, rule (c) is prior to rule (b);   
   (d) a list including $J*T$ components;  
3) Input `opt` is OPTIONAL. If `opt='delate'`, all transition probability from compartment `n` will be removed.
```
TransitionProb = [('E','I'), ('I','R'), ('I','D'), ('M','R'), ('Q','D'), ('H','D'), ('H','R')]
q = data.q
for i in TransitionProb:
    user.set_transition_compartment(n=i[0], m=i[1], prob=q[i])
```
Define the decision-dependent transition probability eta between a pair of compartments by function `#.set_transition_compartment_dp`. There are ten inputs:
1) the first input `flow` is a tuple including four components. The first and second component are the names of start and end compartments; the third component is the index of group; and the fourth component is the index of time;
2) the second to fourth inputs `beta`, `gamma` and `alpha` are all OPTIONAL, which are the coefficients of compartment variable $X$, flow variable $x$ and constant term in the molecule of $\eta$, respectively. The formats of `beta` and `gamma` are $N*J$ list, and the default values are zero lists. The format of `alpha` is float or int, and the default value is 0.
3) the fifth to seven inputs `betadeno`, `gammadeno` and `alphadeno` are OPTIONAL, 
which are the coefficients of compartment variable $X$, 
flow variable $x$ 
and constant term in the denominator of $\eta$, 
respectively. The formats of `beta` and `gamma` are $N*J$ list, and the default values are zero lists. The format of `alpha` is float or int, and the default value is 1.
5) the eight and ninth inputs `lb` and `ub` are OPTIONAL, which are the lower and upper bounds of eta, i.e., $max(lb, \eta(X,x)) <=\eta <= min(ub, \eta(X,x))$; The default values are -1e+20 and 1e+20, respectively; Note that `lb` and `ub` are only used in the prediction model (simulation) but will be ingored in the optimization model.
6) the last input `opt` is OPTIONAL. If `opt='delate'`, all transition probability from compartment $n$ to $m$ will be removed.
```
for j in range(group):
    for t in range(period):
        betaSE = [[data.beta[t] * data.w[j] * data.w[k] / data.group_population[k]
                   if compartment[n] == 'I' else 0 for k in range(group)] for n in range(len(population))]
        gammaSE = [[0 for k in range(group)] for n in range(len(population))]
        user.set_transition_compartment_dp(flow=('S', 'E', j, t),
                                           beta=betaSE, gamma=gammaSE, alpha=0, opt=None)
```

## Step 4. Define other constraints
Define the customized linear constraint by function `#.custom_lp`.
There are nine inputs:
1) the first input `fvar` is a list including some compartment variables and flow variables. The compartment variable
       is a tuple including three components: the first component is the name of compartment; the second component is
       the index of group, and the third component is the index of time. The flow variable is a tuple including four
       components: the first and second components are the name of start and end compartments; the third component is
       the index of group and the fourth index of time.
   The dafault value is a empty list.
2) the second input `fcoef` is the list of the coefficients of variables in `fvar`. It has the same length to `fvar`;
   The dafault value is a empty list.
3) the third input `dvar` is a list including the names of some customized variables.
   The dafault value is a empty list. Note that either `fvar` or `dvar` should be defined.
4) the fourth input `dcoef` is a list of the coefficients of variables in `dvar`; It has the same length to `dvar`;
   The dafault value is a empty list.
5) the fifth input `sense` is a string representing the symbol of constraint. `L` means $Ax <= b$; `E` means $Ax=b$,
       while `G` implies '$Ax>=b$;
6) the sixth input `rhs` is a float/int number representing the value of right-hand side
7) the seventh input `name` is the name of constraint, if a constraint name is set repeatly, the coefficients of those variable equals to the values set in the last settings.
8) the eight input `label` is OPTIONAL, if the model is the deterministic model or the constraint does not contain
       compartment variables, `label` does not need to be defined; For the constraint with compartment variables in
       the robustness optimization model, `label` can be set to `Expectation` so that there is no term of `Xdagger` in
       the constraint. The label of equation constraint does not need to be defined as it always equals `Expectation`.
9) the ninth input `option` is OPTIONAL. If `opt='clear'`, then all customized linear constraints are removed.
For simplification, we only show three instances to define the linear constraints used in SEIHR model
```
pm = data.pm
pq = data.pq
attractive = 0.5
for t in range(period):
    for j in range(group):
        # x^{I,M}_{j,t} + x^{I,Q}_{j,t} <= attractive * I_{j,t}. Because label='Expectation', the constraint in the
        #   robustness model is same to that in the deterministic model. If we do not set label='Expectation' and try to
        #   solve the robustness model, the constraint will be automatically transformed as:
        #   x^{I,M}_{j,t} + x^{I,Q}_{j,t} - attractive * I_{j,t} + (attractive)^2/(2 * theta) * Idagger_{j,t}<= 0
        user.custom_lp(fvar=[('I', 'M', j, t),  ('I', 'Q', j, t), ('I', j, t)],
                       fcoef=[1, 1, -attractive],
                       sense='L',
                       rhs=0,
                       name='testAllocation.' + str(j) + '.' + str(t),
                       label='Expectation')
        # x^{I,M}_{j,t} = sum_{s in [S]} p^{M}_{j,t} z_{j,t,s}. This constraint is an equation and we do not set the
        #   value of 'label', although it contains a compartment variable.
        user.custom_lp(fvar= [('I', 'M', j, t)],
                       fcoef= [-1],
                       dvar=['z.' + str(j) + '.' + str(t) + '.' + str(s) for s in range(S)],
                       dcoef=[pm[j][t] for s in range(S)],
                       sense='E',
                       rhs=0,
                       name='Positive_ItoM.' + str(j) + '.' + str(t))
for j in range(group):
    # sum_{s in [S]} u_{j,s} = 1. This constraint is an equation and does not have compartment variables. We do not set
    # the value of 'label'.
    user.custom_lp(dvar=['u.' + str(j) + '.' + str(s) for s in range(S)],
                   dcoef=[1 for s in range(S)],
                   sense='E',
                   rhs=1,
                   name='Uequal.' + str(j))
```
Define the customized quadratic constraint by function `#.custom_qp`.
There are twelve inputs:
1) the formats of the first four inputs `fvarlp`, `fcoeflp`, `dvarlp` and `dcoeflp` are same to the inputs `fvar`,
       `fcoef`, `dvar`, `dcoef` defined in `#.custom_lp`;  
2) the fifth and seventh inputs 'fvarqp' and 'dvarqp' are the lists with the same formats to 'fvarlp' and 'dvarlp',
       respectively, which are the quadratic terms (i.e., variable^2);  
3) the sixth and eighth inputs `fcoefqp` and `dcoefqp` are the lists of the coefficients of the components in `fvarqp`
       and 'dvarqp', respectively;  
4) the ninth, tenth and eleventh inputs `sense`, `rhs` and `name` are same to those defined in `#.custom_lp`;  
5) the twelfth input `option` is OPTIONAL. If `opt='clear'`, then all customized quadratic constraints are removed.
For simplification, we only show the quadratic constraints used in SEIHR model as below.
       That is, $$0.25 * (\phi_1)^2 + C_{j,t,s} <= 0.25 * (\phi_2)^2$$
```
for t in range(period):
    for j in range(group):
        for s in range(S):
            user.custom_qp(dvarqp=['phi1.' + str(j) + '.' + str(t) + '.' + str(s),
                                   'phi2.' + str(j) + '.' + str(t) + '.' + str(s)],
                           dcoefqp=[0.25, -0.25],
                           sense='L',
                           rhs= -Test_capacity[t] * Test_probability[s] * data.bhat[j],
                           name='SOC.' + str(j) + '.' + str(t) + '.' + str(s))
```

## Step 5. Define objective
Define the minimization (sense='min') or maximization (sense='max') problem by function `#.set_objectivetype`.
```
user.set_objectivetype(sense='min')
```
Define the coefficient values of decision variables in the objective function by function `#.set_objective`.
There are three inputs:
1) the first input 'state' represents the name of variables. There are three types of 'state': 
    (a) a tuple with three components (compartment name, index of group and index of time), which can represent the compartment variable
       (for example, state=('I',j, t)); 
    (b) a tuple with four components (name of start compartment, name of end
       compartment, index of group and index of time), which can represent the flow variable (for example,
       state=('I','Q', j, t)); 
    (c) a string representing the name of a customized variable;
2) the second input `value` is the coefficient value of the variable corresponding to the input `state`;
3) the twelfth input `option` is OPTIONAL. If `opt='clear'`, then all coefficients are removed.
```
cd = data.cd
ci = data.ci
for j in range(group):
    for t in range(period):
        user.set_objective(state=('I', j, t), value=ci)
user.set_objective(state=('D', j, period - 1), value=cd)
```
## Step 6. Solve and output
Define the solver, the current version only support CPLEX and Gurobi.
```
user.set_solver(solver='cplex')
```
Define the solution approach. There are three settings:
       `SF`: using step function to approximate the desicion- dependent transition probability and solve the model;
       `ME`: using McCormick envelopes to approximate the desicion-dependent transition probability and solve the
             model;
       `SO`: using simulation-optimization approach to obtain near-optimal solution. This approach depends on
             the initial solution of flow variables. In default, the initial solution is automatically generated by
             'ME' approach. Also, we can use the function `#.set_initial_solution` with three inputs:
             `compartment1` and `compartment2` are the start and end compartments associated with a flow variable.
             `val` is a $J*T$ list and each component is the value of group $j$ in time $t$. For example:
              user.set_initial_solution(compartment1='S', compartment2='SS', val=[[50 for t in range(period)] for j in range(group)])
```
user.set_approximation(opt='SO')
```
If users use the 'SO' approach to solve the model, the log stream can be recorded by the function `#.set_log_stream_SO`.
There are two inputs:
1) the first input `label` is set to 1 if users want to record the log, otherwise 0 (default).
2) the second inout `file` is the path and name of the file (.txt)
```
user.set_log_stream_SO(label=1, file='SEIHR/log_SEIHR_exp')
```
Solve the model by function `#.solve`
There are three inputs:
1) the first input is to set the type of model (i.e., `Expectation` for determinisitc model or `Robustness` for robustness model);
2) the second input `ct` is OPTIONAL representing the computational time. Note that for `SF` and `ME` approaches, `ct`
       is the total computational time, while for `SO` approach, it is the computational time in each iteration. If
       users do not set a value to this input, the solving procedure will be stopped until the optimal solution is
       obtained.
3) the third input `target` is the target used in the robustness model, i.e., the objective value should be no greater
       than the target. This input is useless for the deterministic model.
The output is a tuple with five components if there exists a feasible solution. Otherwise the output equals 0.
1) the first component is the status of solving procedure to show either the solution is optimal or feasible;
2) the optimal objective value;
3) the list of compartment variables, which is a $N*J*T$ list;
4) the list of flow variables, which is a $N*N*J*T$ list. Note that for the undefined flow variables, the value in the
       list is set to 0;
5) the dictionary associated with customized variables. Each key in the dictionary is the name of a customized variable.
```
(status, obj, Xopt, xopt, Xc) = user.solve(label='Expectation', ct=3600)
```
To get a partial solutions, we can also use the following functions
Function `#.get_solution_compartment` is used to get the value of compartment variables.
1) the input is the list of the names of some compartments;
2) the output is a dictionary, where each key is a compartment name and the associated value is a $J*T$ list representing the population of group $j$ at time $t$.
```
Xsolution_exp = user.get_solution_compartment(compartment=compartment)
```
Function `#.get_solution_flow_variable` is used to get the value of flow variables.
1) the first input `compartmentfrom` is the list of the names of the start compartments;
2) the second input `compartmentto` is the list of the names of the end compartments. The length of `compartmentto`
       is same to `compartmentfrom`;
3) the output is a dictionary, where each key is a flow variable from a compartment to another. The associated value
       is a $J*T$ list representing the flow of group $j$ at time $t$.
```
xsolution_exp = user.get_solution_flow_variable(compartmentfrom=['I','I','Q'],compartmentto=['M','Q','H'])
```
Function `#.get_solution_flow_variable` is used to get the value of flow variables.
1) the input `name` is the list of the names of the customized variables;
2) the output is a dictionary, where each key is a customized variable. The associated value is a number.
```
Xcustom_exp = user.get_solution_custom_variable(name=
                                          ['u.' + str(j) + '.' + str(s) for s in range(S) for j in range(group)]
                                          + ['phi1.' + str(j) + '.' + str(t) + '.'+str(s)
                                             for s in range(S) for j in range(group) for t in range(period)]
                                          + ['phi2.' + str(j) + '.' + str(t) + '.'+str(s)
                                             for s in range(S) for j in range(group) for t in range(period)]
                                          + ['z.' + str(j) + '.' + str(t) + '.' + str(s)
                                             for s in range(S) for j in range(group) for t in range(period)])
```
Print the solution based on the solution obtained by functions `#.get_solution_compartment`,
       `#.get_solution_flow_variable` and `#.user.get_solution_custom_variable`
There are three OPTIONAL inputs: `X` for compartment variables; `x` for flow variables; `xc` for customized variables.
```
user.Solution_print(X=Xsolution_exp, x=xsolution_exp, xc=None)
```
## Step 7. Simulation 
Generate the samples corresponding to the random transition probability relative to the reference transition
       probability following uniform distribution at compartment level by `#.Sample_generation`
There are five inputs:
1) the first input `n` is the list of start compartments;
2) the second input `m` is the list of end compartments, which length is same to the first input `n`;
3) the third input `lb` is the list of lower bounds of random transition probabilities between all pairs of start and end compartments;
4) the fourth input `ub` is the list of upper bounds of random transition probabilities between all pairs of start and end compartments;
5) the fifth input is to define the sample size.
The output is a $sample * N * N$ list.
The following example is to generate 1000 samples corresponding to random transition probability from compartment $S$
       to $E$ and from compartment $I$ to $D$. They following a $Uniform(1, 1.1)$ and Uniform $(0.9,1.1)$, respectively.
'''
sample = 1000
randomq = user.Sample_generation(n=['S','I'], m=['E','D'], lb=[1, 1], ub=[0.9, 1.1], size=sample)
#Define the flow variables (user.x) in simulation (prediction)
x = [[[[0 for t in range(period)] for j in range(group)] for m in range(compart_num)] for n in range(compart_num)]
x[2][3] = [[xopt[2][3][j][t] for t in range(period)] for j in range(group)]  # flow variable from I to M
x[2][4] = [[xopt[2][4][j][t] for t in range(period)] for j in range(group)]  # flow variable from I to Q
x[4][5] = [[xopt[4][5][j][t] for t in range(period)] for j in range(group)]  # flow variable from Q to H
user.x = x
```
Simulation via function `#.Prediction`
The input is a list, which is dependent on the prediction method (deterministic/stochastic/robust prediction for
       upper and lower bounds)
For the deterministic prediction, the input `opt` equals
1) `['D']`: using the deterministic prediction model to generate the population of compartments;
2) `['D', 'stair']`: using the deterministic prediction model to generate the population of compartments, where the
     decision-dependent transition probability is approximated by step function. The step is 5*10^(-5);
3) `['D', None, random]`: using the deterministic prediction model to generate the population of compartments under
     random transition probability. 'random' is a $N*N$ list representing the relative value between the true
     transition probability and the reference transition probability.
4) `['D', None, random]`: using the deterministic prediction model to generate the population of compartments under
     random transition probability, where the decision-dependent transition probability is approximated by step
     function.
For the stochastic prediction, the input 'opt' equals
1) `['S']`: using the stochastic prediction model to generate the population of compartments;
2) `['S', random]`: using the stochastic prediction model to generate the population of compartments under
     random transition probability.
To generate the lower bound via the robust prediction, the input 'opt' equals
`['RL', theta, coef]`: `RL` defines the robust prediction; theta is an OPTIONAL float/int number (default 10). A larger
     value represents more conversative level of lower bound; coef is an OPTIONAL float/int number (default 1), which
     is the coefficient of the compartments.
To generate the upper bound via the robust prediction, users only need to replace `RL` by `RU` in the input `opt`.
The output is the simulated compartments, which is a $N*J*T$ list.
```
Xsim_exp = [0 for s in range(sample)]
for s in range(sample):
    Xsim_exp[s] = user.Prediction(opt=['D', None, randomq[s]])
```

## Step 8. Save results
Save the results by the function `#.save_result`.
There are five inputs:
1) the first input `filename` is the path and name of the excel file (.xlsx) to record the results;
2) the second input `compartment` (OPTIONAL) is the simulated value of compartments, which is a $sample * N * N$ list;
3) the third input `dvar` (OPTIONAL) is the value of flow variables obtained by the optimization model, which is a
       $N * N * J * T$ list;
4) the fourth input `custom` (OPTIONAL) is the value of customized variables obtained by the optimization model.
       `custom` is a dictionary, where each key is a customized variable. The associated value is a number;
5) the fifth input `lhs` (OPTIONAL) is a list to record the left hand side of the objective function and constraints
       based on the simulated population of compartments. Each component of the input `lhs` is a list including two
       components, where the first component is the name of constraints/objective and the second component is the
       list including all simulation value of the left-hand side of the constraint/ the simulation objective
       corresponding to all samples.
```
lhs = [['objective', [sum([Xsim_exp[s][2][j][t] * ci + Xsim_exp[s][-1][j][t] * cd for j in range(group)])
                             for s in range(sample)]]]
user.save_result(filename='SEIHR/resultSEIHR_exp', compartment=Xsim_exp, dvar=xopt, custom=Xcustom_exp, lhs=lhs)
```
